cruftmaster - utilities for forensic archiving of various media types
Copyright (c) 2018, Hard Problems Group, LLC
Licensed under the terms of the MIT Public License.

For details, please contact:
Matt Heck
mheck@hardproblemsgroup.com


cruftmaster
===========

1   Introduction

Do you have a pile of old recordable CDs, DVDs, or Blu-Ray discs?

They're all in cases, right?
Sealed?
In climate-controlled storage?

Not so much?

Oh dear.

While a 2007 report from the National Institute of Stanadards and Technology
[1], prepared primarily for the Library of Congress, showed that some discs
were predicted to have lifespans up to 40 years, they found that others might
fail in 10-15 years.

And, all of those discs have one thing in common: they assumed people were
storing them a lot better than you probably are.  Specifically, in jewel
cases, on shelves, in buildings with constant humidity and temperature.

If you've got a binder full of optical media sitting in your garage, or a
nice hot storage unit that gets wet when it rains, I hate to break it to you,
but you're not looking at 40 year media life.  You're looking at more like
7-10 year media life, and you need to start transferring that stuff right
now-- and not all of those transfers are going to work.

That's right-- what would have been a technical debt problem a few years
earlier, has now turned into a data recovery problem.

Oh, heavens.  What to do?

Well, as it happens, solutions exist.  The problem is that they tend to come
in two flavors: very comprehensive, but very expensive; and free, but piecemeal
and byzantine.

Commercial forensic recovery software, suitable for law enforcement usage with
minimal training, can provide a good "one stop shop", but is not really
suitable for the small archivist with a minimal budget.  "Open source"
utilities are quite capable, and free to use, but they tend to be purpose-
specific, quirky, and totally unlike each other in terms of options-- and you
need to be familiar with about forty of them.

Even if you do spring for the commercial stuff, you may find it doesn't fit
your workflow very well.  Having to clear the big pile of CDs off the kitchen
table because it's time for dinner isn't something that comes up in an
enterprise setting-- it feels ridiculous, and it's frustrating.  But it
totally happens, and you need a workflow that can deal wih it.

Cruftmaster is designed to provide a set of utilities that can make working
with the wide variety of open source command-line utilities available for
Linux easier.  It aims to provide a consistent way to rapidly archive optical
discs in a sensible way, going to an uncommon amount of effort to figure out
a sensible name for a disc, and using rapid first passes, followed by deeper
recovery work either on the spot, or at a later date.

It is designed, first and foremost, to kill excuses for not archiving old
media-- because the longer you wait, the less you're going to get back off of
it.

Cruftmaster is also designed for a very specific secondary use case: rapidly
digesting optical media under time pressure, when the media cannot
realistically be removed from its storage location.  For further information
about this use case, please contact me.

Watch this space!  Changes will be rapid and frequent.  A call for
contributors will happen around March 15th, 2019.

For details on inquiries, please contact:
mheck@hardproblemsgroup.com

Matt Heck
President
Hard Problems Group, LLC
Henderson, NV
12JAN2019


[1] "Final Report: NIST/Library of Congress (LC) Optical Disc Longevity
    Study".  September, 2007.
    https://www.loc.gov/preservation/resources/rt/NIST_LC_OpticalDiscLongevity.pdf



2   Installation

At present, cruftmaster is in early development.  Cruftmaster runs a large
number of special-purpose utilities from a set of Ruby scripts.  Therefore the
best thing to do is currently this:

1. Ensure you are working in a "login shell".  Check your terminal program's
settings until you find that option, and turn it on.  (Practically all of
them either use login shells by default, or offer an option to do so.)  This
makes things easier for rvm.

2. Install rvm, the Ruby Version Manager.  You can find that here:

    https://rvm.io/rvm/install

3. Log out of everything and log back in.  (Or not.  But I recommend it, if
   you've just installed rvm.)

4. Using rvm, install Ruby 2.5.3, and use it:

    rvm install 2.5.3
    rvm use 2.5.3

5. If this user accounts is going to be used solely for cruftmaster, or if
   you don't otherwise use Ruby, you might as well set the default version
   to the right one:

    rvm default 2.5.3

6. Check out the cruftmaster source code:

    git clone git@github.com:hpg-mheck/cruftmaster.git

7. Switch to a feature branch, if desired.  Right now, you definitely want to
   do this.  At the time of this writing (12JAN2019), this is the best
   feature branch to evaluate:

    git checkout F001-Refactor

8. Try running rip-disc.rb, the intended main entry point for ripping a single
   optical disc of unknown provenance.


You'll notice that, other than rvm and ruby, I didn't cover prerequisites.
This is intentional: cruftmaster is supposed to provide some reasonable
assistance at getting those set up.  So, when you run rip-disc.rb, you'll get
some notifications that you need to use "gem", ruby's package manager, to
install some libraries.  Following that, you'll get complaints about missing
utilities, if any.  I'd like to make sure these capabilities work, so please,
take a moment to test this before doing the bulk prerequisite installs.

